README.md, before:

Source code for the anvi'o community web page served at https://anvio.org

After getting a copy of it, you can run this web page on your local using the following command:

```
bundle exec jekyll serve --incremental
```

Once you run a copy of the web page, visit http://localhost:4000/web-tips/ to find some useful tips for content developers.

If you get an error like this:

/var/lib/gems/3.0.0/gems/jekyll-4.2.1/lib/jekyll/commands/serve/servlet.rb:3:in `require': cannot load such file -- webrick (LoadError).

You can just run this command to install `Webrick` toolkit:

```
bundle add webrick
```

After `Webrick` succesfully installed, you can run this web page on your local using the following command: 

```
bundle exec jekyll serve --incremental --trace
```

# Contributing

If you have any questions regarding anything below, please get in touch with us on the anvi'o Slack channel (an up-to-date link is at the top of the front page of https://anvio.org).

## Update / add new anvi'o resources defined in the main page

Please edit the relevant file under `_data/resources/` in this repository. To add a new resource, you don't need to do anything in the anvi'o codebase, unless the author of the resource is not defined in `_data/people.yaml`. If that is the case, you will first have to take care of it by adding them into `DEVELOPERS.yaml` or `CONTRIBUTORS.yaml`. If you'd like to do it yourself, please read the section below on how to 'update people data'. If you don't want to deal with that, please reach out to an anvi'o developer.

Updating the resouces file should be easy. But please note that the order of items in that file should have a logical order from basic to more advanced things within each section. Follow an example for variables and language, and try to use existing tags unless there is certainly a need to define a new one.

## Contribute a blog post or tutorial to be hosted on anvio.org

If you would like to write a blog post or tutorial for the anvi'o web page, anvio.org would be more than happy to host you!

# Upkeeping

A lot of the components of this web page is dynamic, but others require some hands-on upkeeping (at least for now). You can update EVERYTHING all at once by running this command:

``` bash
_scripts/update-all.sh
```

**Please remember**: Everything above and below assumes that you are tracking the development branch of anvi'o, and you are working with an up-to-date repository, unless otherwise is stated. Please don't forget to double-check `git status` to make sure you know what you're about to commit.

The following sections clarify individual updates that are run by `update-all.sh` script. If you run that, you don't need to run any of the ones below, but they're here for posterity.

## Update people data

To update the list of anvi'o authors and contributors, run this (assuming your anvi'o code directory is at `~/github/anvio`):

``` bash
_scripts/update-people-data.sh
```

If there is a new name to be mentioned in `_data/resources.yaml`, their GitHub username must be first mentioned in `_data/people.yaml`. If they are not in there, please first add their information to either `DEVELOPERS.yaml` or `CONTRIBUTORS.yaml` in the anvi'o repository following the style of the previous entries, and then run `_scripts/update-people-data.sh` from the root directory of the anvio.org repository. Yes, it is tedious, but also very important to keep track of people in both repositories.

Please see this [README](https://github.com/merenlab/anvio/tree/master/anvio/data/misc/PEOPLE/README.md) file in the anvi'o repository to see how you can improve the accurate tracking of anvi'o indivdiuals.

## Update help pages

Help pages are served at, https://anvio.org/help/main or (http://localhost:4000/help/main if you are running the web page on your local) for the **active development branch**. Others can be found under `help/7` or `help/7.1` (which will be consolidated into a single `help/stable` folder in the future).

**Never edit the help pages manually or in the anvio.org repository**. They are meant to be updated in the anvi'o main repository under `anvio/docs`. What is rendered on the web page is automatically generated by anvi'o (because that's how cool anvi'o is).

To update the help pages on the web with the latest changes in anvi'o main repository, run this command:

```bash
anvi-script-gen-help-pages -o help/main
```

But **please do not update `help/7` or `help/7.1`** and contact Meren if there is something wrong with any of the files under them.

Triple check `git status` to make sure you know what you're about to commit.

## Update the anvi'o programs and concepts network


The anvi'o network is served at https://anvio.org/network or at http://localhost:4000/network if you are running the web page on your local.

To update the help pages with the latest changes in anvi'o main repository, run this command:

```bash
anvi-script-gen-programs-network -o network/network.json
```

Commit message:

a little deeper insights for what's under the hood

README.md, after:

Source code for the anvi'o community web page served at https://anvio.org

After getting a copy of it, you can run this web page on your local using the following command:

```
bundle exec jekyll serve --incremental
```

Once you run a copy of the web page, visit http://localhost:4000/web-tips/ to find some useful tips for content developers.

If you get an error like this:

/var/lib/gems/3.0.0/gems/jekyll-4.2.1/lib/jekyll/commands/serve/servlet.rb:3:in `require': cannot load such file -- webrick (LoadError).

You can just run this command to install `Webrick` toolkit:

```
bundle add webrick
```

After `Webrick` succesfully installed, you can run this web page on your local using the following command:

```
rm -rf _site && bundle exec jekyll serve --incremental --trace
```

# Contributing

If you have any questions regarding anything below, please get in touch with us on the anvi'o Slack channel (an up-to-date link is at the top of the front page of https://anvio.org).

## Update / add new anvi'o resources defined in the main page

Please edit the relevant file under `_data/resources/` in this repository. To add a new resource, you don't need to do anything in the anvi'o codebase, unless the author of the resource is not defined in `_data/people.yaml`. If that is the case, you will first have to take care of it by adding them into `DEVELOPERS.yaml` or `CONTRIBUTORS.yaml`. If you'd like to do it yourself, please read the section below on how to 'update people data'. If you don't want to deal with that, please reach out to an anvi'o developer.

Updating the resouces file should be easy. But please note that the order of items in that file should have a logical order from basic to more advanced things within each section. Follow an example for variables and language, and try to use existing tags unless there is certainly a need to define a new one.

## Contribute a blog post or tutorial to be hosted on anvio.org

If you would like to write a blog post or tutorial for the anvi'o web page, anvio.org would be more than happy to host you!

# Upkeeping

A lot of the components of this web page are **automatically generated** and YOU SHOULD NOT MAKE ANY MANUAL CHANGES TO THE CONTENT UNLESS YOU ARE 100% SURE THAT YOU SHOULD :)

Luckily, you can update EVERYTHING all at once, and synchronize author and help pages to the latest in anvi'o codebase, by running this command in your local copy of the repository:

``` bash
_scripts/update-all.sh
```

**Please remember** the following items before doing this:

* Every script `update-all.sh` runs will assumes that you are in the root directory of the web repository (such as `~/github/anvio.org/`), so don't use absolute paths to run anything under `_sripts` directory from somewhere else.
* Every script will assume that you have an anvi'o git repository at `~/github/anvio` -- please make sure it is the case, and make sure you have checked out the `master` branch with a clean `git pull` (so your repository is fully synced with the upstream).
* Every script will ALSO assume that you are in an anvi'o environemnt. I.e., when you run `anvi-self-test --version` you do not get a command not found error, and see the `anvio-dev` as the version (i.e., anvi'o is not installed on your system but you are set up to be tracking the active development repo).
* Make sure to run the `update-all.sh` (or any other script for that matter) while you are *not* running the Jekyll server. You should start your local Jekyll server to see how things are only after the scripts are successfully finished running. And you should always run the Jekyll locally to make sure you are not getting any weird errors during runtime and things are looking as you expect them to look :)

The following sections clarify individual updates that are run by `update-all.sh` script. If you run that, you don't need to run any of the ones below, but they're here for posterity.

## Update people data

To update the list of anvi'o authors and contributors, as well as their GitHub contributions, run this (everything below will assume that you have the up-to-date git repository for anvi'o at  *and* you have checkedout the *master* branch):

``` bash
_scripts/update-people-data.sh
```

If there is a new name to be mentioned in `_data/resources.yaml`, their GitHub username must be first mentioned in `_data/people.yaml`. If they are not in there, please first add their information to either `DEVELOPERS.yaml` or `CONTRIBUTORS.yaml` in the anvi'o repository following the style of the previous entries, and then run `_scripts/update-people-data.sh` from the root directory of the anvio.org repository. Yes, it is tedious, but also very important to keep track of people in both repositories.

Please see this [README](https://github.com/merenlab/anvio/tree/master/anvio/data/misc/PEOPLE/README.md) file in the anvi'o repository to see how you can improve the accurate tracking of anvi'o indivdiuals.

## Update help pages

Help pages are served at, https://anvio.org/help/main or (http://localhost:4000/help/main if you are running the web page on your local) for the **active development branch**. Others can be found under `help/7` or `help/7.1` (which will be consolidated into a single `help/stable` folder in the future).

**Never edit the help pages manually or in the anvio.org repository**. They are meant to be updated in the anvi'o main repository under `anvio/docs`. What is rendered on the web page is automatically generated by anvi'o (because that's how cool anvi'o is).

To update the help pages on the web with the latest changes in anvi'o main repository, run this command:

```bash
anvi-script-gen-help-pages -o help/main
```

But **please do not update `help/7` or `help/7.1`** and contact Meren if there is something wrong with any of the files under them.

Triple check `git status` to make sure you know what you're about to commit.

## Update the anvi'o programs and concepts network


The anvi'o network is served at https://anvio.org/network or at http://localhost:4000/network if you are running the web page on your local.

To update the help pages with the latest changes in anvi'o main repository, run this command:

```bash
anvi-script-gen-programs-network -o network/network.json
```
