workshops/2025-oldenburg/index.md, before:

---
layout: blog
authors: [ivagljiva, FlorianTrigodet, meren]
title: "Oldenburg workshop - March 2025"
excerpt: "2025 anvi'o workshop at the HIFMB in Oldenburg"
redirect_from: /oldenburg-25
date: 2025-03-03
tags: [workshop]
comments: true
---

We are planning a free, in-person workshop and early-career researcher symposium to discuss integrated microbial 'omics and learn how to use anvi'o. The topics that we will cover during the workshop include,

* Genomics
* Metagenomics
* Genome-resolved metagenomics
* Pangenomics
* Phylogenomics
* Microbial population genetics

If you are interested in attending, please consider applying as soon as possible as we have limited number of seats in the workshop venue, and mark your calendars for March 3-7 2025.

Please feel free to share this page with anyone who may benefit from this workshop, and please note that we will cover travel and accommodation (as long as our funds last), so we strongly encourage applications from institutions with limited resources around the globe.

Feel free to write to any of us if you have any questions.

{:.warning}
The **application deadline was on Jan 10, 2025** and we are no longer accepting new applications.

{% include IMAGE width=80 path="/images/workshops/2025-oldenburg/flyer.png" caption="The flyer for the workshop." %}

## When and Where

From March 3, 2025 (Monday) to March 7, 2025 (Friday) at the Helmholtz Institute for Functional Marine Biodiversity (HIFMB) in Oldenburg, Germany. Here is a map for you:

<p><center>
<iframe src="https://www.google.com/maps/embed?pb=!1m18!1m12!1m3!1d2392.8755266399307!2d8.172422278515025!3d53.15406087223417!2m3!1f0!2f0!3f0!3m2!1i1024!2i768!4f13.1!3m3!1m2!1s0x47b6dfcd31a139a3%3A0xe17f26e2f76ff2c8!2sHelmholtz%20Institute%20for%20Functional%20Marine%20Biodiversity%20at%20the%20University%20of%20Oldenburg!5e0!3m2!1sen!2sde!4v1734100072289!5m2!1sen!2sde" width="600" height="450" style="border:0" allowfullscreen=""></iframe>
</center></p>

## Program

In addition to intense hands-on training sessions, this event includes an ECR symposium, during which all of the participants will give lightning talks about their research. We will send the details of lightning talks to each participant upon their invitation.

Here is a very preliminary overview of the workshop content:

#### Monday 3: Genomics

9:00 - 9:15 | Introduction to the **workshop faculty & setting**
9:15 - 10:15 | Introduction to the **anvi'o software ecosystem**
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | The anvi'o **interactive interface**
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | **Genomics** (gene calling, functional annotation, taxonomic characterization)
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Genomics**, continued

#### Tuesday 4: Metabolic reconstruction; Pangenomics

9:00 - 10:15 | **Functions and metabolism** (estimation of metabolic potential in genomes and metagenomes)
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | **Functions and metabolism**, continued
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | **Phylogenomics** (theoretical introduction and hands-on session)
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Phylogenomics**, continued

#### Wednesday 5: Pangenomics; Phylogenomics

9:00 - 10:15 | **Pangenomics** (introduction to pangenomics, and its computational and biological underpinnings)
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | **Pangenomics** (hands-on session)
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | **Pangenomics** (hands-on session), continued
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Pangenome graphs** (theory + hands-on)

#### Thursday 6: Metagenomics; Genome-resolved metagenomics

9:00 - 10:15 | **Metagenomic read recruitment** (theoretical introduction and hands-on session)
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | **Metagenomic read recruitment**, continued
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | **Genome-resolved metagenomics** (a discussion on best practices in genome binning and refinement)
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Genome-resolved metagenomics**, continued

#### Friday 7: Microbial population genetics; Scalable bioinformatics

9:00 - 10:15 | **Microbial population genetics** (single-nucleotide variants, single-codon variants, single-amino acid variants, protein structures, and what we can learn from them)
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | **Microbial population genetics**, continued
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | How to use **automated, scalable, and reproducible bioinformatics workflows**
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Bioninformatics workflows**, continued

## Workshop materials

We will link the lecture slides here in the future.

The table below shows the links to the tutorials used in each workshop session.

Monday | Interactive interface | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#visualize-a-sag](https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#visualize-a-sag)
Monday | Genomics | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#create-and-annotate-a-contigs-database](https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#create-and-annotate-a-contigs-database) (until 'Working with Multiple SAGs' section)
Tuesday | Metabolism | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/fmt-mag-metabolism/](https://anvio.org/tutorials/fmt-mag-metabolism/)
Tuesday | Phylogenomics | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#phylogenomics](https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#phylogenomics)
Wednesday | Pangenomics | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#pangenomics](https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#pangenomics)
Wednesday | Pangenome graphs | TBD
Thursday | Metagenomic read recruitment | [https://merenlab.org/tutorials/read-recruitment/](https://merenlab.org/tutorials/read-recruitment/)
Thursday | Metagenomic binning | [https://merenlab.org/tutorials/infant-gut/#chapter-i-genome-resolved-metagenomics](https://merenlab.org/tutorials/infant-gut/#chapter-i-genome-resolved-metagenomics) and TBD
Friday | Population genomics | [https://merenlab.org/tutorials/infant-gut/#chapter-vi-microbial-population-genetics](https://merenlab.org/tutorials/infant-gut/#chapter-vi-microbial-population-genetics) and TBD
Friday | Workflows | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/scaling-up/](https://anvio.org/tutorials/scaling-up/)

## How much does it cost?

We will cover your lunches and coffee/tea breaks. Travel support and accommodation is available upon request while the funds last. The rest is up to you.

We thank the [Universitätsgesellschaft Oldenburg e.V. (UGO)](https://uol.de/ugo) and the [Alfred-Wegener-Institute (AWI)](https://www.awi.de/) for their financial support of this event.

## Registration link

**The application deadline was January 10, 2025**.

## List of participants

TBA.

Commit message:

add link to slides on figshare

workshops/2025-oldenburg/index.md, after:

---
layout: blog
authors: [ivagljiva, FlorianTrigodet, meren]
title: "Oldenburg workshop - March 2025"
excerpt: "2025 anvi'o workshop at the HIFMB in Oldenburg"
redirect_from: /oldenburg-25
date: 2025-03-03
tags: [workshop]
comments: true
---

We are planning a free, in-person workshop and early-career researcher symposium to discuss integrated microbial 'omics and learn how to use anvi'o. The topics that we will cover during the workshop include,

* Genomics
* Metagenomics
* Genome-resolved metagenomics
* Pangenomics
* Phylogenomics
* Microbial population genetics

If you are interested in attending, please consider applying as soon as possible as we have limited number of seats in the workshop venue, and mark your calendars for March 3-7 2025.

Please feel free to share this page with anyone who may benefit from this workshop, and please note that we will cover travel and accommodation (as long as our funds last), so we strongly encourage applications from institutions with limited resources around the globe.

Feel free to write to any of us if you have any questions.

{:.warning}
The **application deadline was on Jan 10, 2025** and we are no longer accepting new applications.

{% include IMAGE width=80 path="/images/workshops/2025-oldenburg/flyer.png" caption="The flyer for the workshop." %}

## When and Where

From March 3, 2025 (Monday) to March 7, 2025 (Friday) at the Helmholtz Institute for Functional Marine Biodiversity (HIFMB) in Oldenburg, Germany. Here is a map for you:

<p><center>
<iframe src="https://www.google.com/maps/embed?pb=!1m18!1m12!1m3!1d2392.8755266399307!2d8.172422278515025!3d53.15406087223417!2m3!1f0!2f0!3f0!3m2!1i1024!2i768!4f13.1!3m3!1m2!1s0x47b6dfcd31a139a3%3A0xe17f26e2f76ff2c8!2sHelmholtz%20Institute%20for%20Functional%20Marine%20Biodiversity%20at%20the%20University%20of%20Oldenburg!5e0!3m2!1sen!2sde!4v1734100072289!5m2!1sen!2sde" width="600" height="450" style="border:0" allowfullscreen=""></iframe>
</center></p>

## Program

In addition to intense hands-on training sessions, this event includes an ECR symposium, during which all of the participants will give lightning talks about their research. We will send the details of lightning talks to each participant upon their invitation.

Here is a very preliminary overview of the workshop content:

#### Monday 3: Genomics

9:00 - 9:15 | Introduction to the **workshop faculty & setting**
9:15 - 10:15 | Introduction to the **anvi'o software ecosystem**
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | The anvi'o **interactive interface**
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | **Genomics** (gene calling, functional annotation, taxonomic characterization)
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Genomics**, continued

#### Tuesday 4: Metabolic reconstruction; Pangenomics

9:00 - 10:15 | **Functions and metabolism** (estimation of metabolic potential in genomes and metagenomes)
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | **Functions and metabolism**, continued
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | **Phylogenomics** (theoretical introduction and hands-on session)
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Phylogenomics**, continued

#### Wednesday 5: Pangenomics; Phylogenomics

9:00 - 10:15 | **Pangenomics** (introduction to pangenomics, and its computational and biological underpinnings)
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | **Pangenomics** (hands-on session)
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | **Pangenomics** (hands-on session), continued
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Pangenome graphs** (theory + hands-on)

#### Thursday 6: Metagenomics; Genome-resolved metagenomics

9:00 - 10:15 | **Metagenomic read recruitment** (theoretical introduction and hands-on session)
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | **Metagenomic read recruitment**, continued
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | **Genome-resolved metagenomics** (a discussion on best practices in genome binning and refinement)
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Genome-resolved metagenomics**, continued

#### Friday 7: Microbial population genetics; Scalable bioinformatics

9:00 - 10:15 | **Microbial population genetics** (single-nucleotide variants, single-codon variants, single-amino acid variants, protein structures, and what we can learn from them)
10:15 - 10:30 | Coffee & Tea Break
10:30 - 12:00 | **Microbial population genetics**, continued
12:00 - 13:00 | Group lunch at Bar Celona
13:00 - 14:00 | Symposium talks
14:00 - 15:30 | How to use **automated, scalable, and reproducible bioinformatics workflows**
15:30 - 15:45 | Coffee & Tea Break
15:45 - 17:30 | **Bioninformatics workflows**, continued

## Workshop materials

The lecture slides for the workshop can be downloaded from [this Figshare link](https://figshare.com/articles/presentation/Lecture_Slides_for_the_anvi_o_workshop_in_Oldenburg/28525244).

The table below shows the links to the tutorials used in each workshop session.

Monday | Interactive interface | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#visualize-a-sag](https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#visualize-a-sag)
Monday | Genomics | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#create-and-annotate-a-contigs-database](https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#create-and-annotate-a-contigs-database) (until 'Working with Multiple SAGs' section)
Tuesday | Metabolism | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/fmt-mag-metabolism/](https://anvio.org/tutorials/fmt-mag-metabolism/)
Tuesday | Phylogenomics | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#phylogenomics](https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#phylogenomics)
Wednesday | Pangenomics | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#pangenomics](https://anvio.org/tutorials/single-cell-genomics-workshop/#pangenomics)
Wednesday | Pangenome graphs | TBD
Thursday | Metagenomic read recruitment | [https://merenlab.org/tutorials/read-recruitment/](https://merenlab.org/tutorials/read-recruitment/)
Thursday | Metagenomic binning | [https://merenlab.org/tutorials/infant-gut/#chapter-i-genome-resolved-metagenomics](https://merenlab.org/tutorials/infant-gut/#chapter-i-genome-resolved-metagenomics) and TBD
Friday | Population genomics | [https://merenlab.org/tutorials/infant-gut/#chapter-vi-microbial-population-genetics](https://merenlab.org/tutorials/infant-gut/#chapter-vi-microbial-population-genetics) and TBD
Friday | Workflows | [https://anvio.org/tutorials/scaling-up/](https://anvio.org/tutorials/scaling-up/)

## How much does it cost?

We will cover your lunches and coffee/tea breaks. Travel support and accommodation is available upon request while the funds last. The rest is up to you.

We thank the [Universitätsgesellschaft Oldenburg e.V. (UGO)](https://uol.de/ugo) and the [Alfred-Wegener-Institute (AWI)](https://www.awi.de/) for their financial support of this event.

## Registration link

**The application deadline was January 10, 2025**.

## List of participants

TBA.
