---
layout: blog
title: "An anvi'o tutorial with Trichodesmium genomes (Chapter 1)"
modified: 2026-03-12
excerpt: "The Genomics Chapter"
categories: [anvio]
authors: [ivagljiva, FlorianTrigodet]
tags: [genomics, hands-on, beginner]
comments: true
---


<div class="extra-info" markdown="1">
<span class="extra-info-header">About this page</span>
This webpage is one chapter of a much larger effort to cover multiple aspects of anvi'o in the same tutorial. If you need more context, please visit [the main page of the tutorial]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/trichodesmium-tutorial/), where you will find information about the dataset we are working with and the commands to download the tutorial datapack.
 </div>

## Quick Navigation

- [Tutorial introduction (main page)]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/trichodesmium-tutorial/)
- [Chapter 1: Genomics]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/trichodesmium-tutorial/chapter-1) ← _you are here_
- [Chapter 2: Pangenomics]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/trichodesmium-tutorial/chapter-2)
- Chapter 3: Phylogenomics _(not yet publicly-available)_
- [Chapter 4: Metabolism]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/trichodesmium-tutorial/chapter-4)

## Chapter 1 - Genomics

To introduce you into the anvi'o-verse, we will run some basic genomics analysis on a single genome. In this case, we will download a known _Trichodesmium_ genome from NCBI to add to our collection. We will learn how to:
- reformat a FASTA file
- generate a {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %}
- annotate gene calls with single-copy core genes and functions
- estimate the taxonomy and completeness/redundancy of the genome
- get data out of the database and into parseable text files

Let's get started.

### Download and reformat the genome

We will supplement our set of _Trichodesmium_ genomes with [this _Trichodesmium_ MAG](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/2238341937) from NCBI. It is labeled as _Trichodesmium_ sp. MAG_R01, so we don't know exactly what species of _Trichodesmium_ this is (yet). The MAG was generated by researchers at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem from a Red Sea metagenome, and it is of scaffold-level quality. 

To download the genome, we will use the command `curl`:

```bash
curl https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/all/GCA/023/356/555/GCA_023356555.1_ASM2335655v1/GCA_023356555.1_ASM2335655v1_genomic.fna.gz -o GCA_023356555.1_ASM2335655v1_genomic.fna.gz
gunzip GCA_023356555.1_ASM2335655v1_genomic.fna.gz
```

Now we have one of the most fundamental files that everyone will have to interact with: [a FASTA file](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTA_format). We can already check the number of contigs by counting the number of `>` characters, which appears once per sequence. We can use the command `grep` for that:

```bash
grep -c '>' GCA_023356555.1_ASM2335655v1_genomic.fna
```

You should see the value `269` in the terminal output. That's a lot of sequences, or in this case: a lot of contigs. That is already telling us a few things about this genome: it is not a singular contig representing a complete and circular genome. Let's have a look at the contig headers:

```bash
grep '>' GCA_023356555.1_ASM2335655v1_genomic.fna
```

As you can see, the headers are rather complex, with a lot of information. Unfortunately, these headers are going to be problematic for downstream analysis, particularly because they include non-alphanumeric characters like spaces, dots, pipe (`|`) and whatnot. And anvi'o knows you would be in trouble if you start working this these headers. Just for fun, you can try to run {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-gen-contigs-database" %} (we will cover what it does very soon), and you will see an error:

```bash
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f GCA_023356555.1_ASM2335655v1_genomic.fna \
                          -o CONTIGS.db \
                          -T 2
```
```
Config Error: At least one of the deflines in your FASTA File does not comply with the 'simple
              deflines' requirement of anvi'o. You can either use the script `anvi-script-
              reformat-fasta` to take care of this issue, or read this section in the tutorial
              to understand the reason behind this requirement (anvi'o is very upset for
              making you do this): http://merenlab.org/2016/06/22/anvio-tutorial-v2/#take-a-
              look-at-your-fasta-file
```

We can use {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-script-reformat-fasta" %} to simplify the FASTA's headers with the flag `--simplify-names`. This command can (optionally) generate a summary report, which is a two column file matching the new and old names of each sequence in the FASTA file. While we are using this command, we can use it to include a specific prefix in the renamed headers with the flag `--prefix` and filter out short contigs (in this example, smaller than 500 bp) with the flag `-l`.
```bash
anvi-script-reformat-fasta GCA_023356555.1_ASM2335655v1_genomic.fna \
                           -o Trichodesmium_sp.fa \
                           --simplify-names \
                           --prefix Trichodesmium_sp_MAG_R01 \
                           -r Trichodesmium_sp_reformat_report.txt \
                           -l 500 \
                           --seq-type NT
```

{:.notice}
You can use this command to further filter your FASTA file: check the options with the online [help page](https://anvio.org/help/main/), or by using the flag `--help` in the terminal.

### Generate a contigs database

The {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} is a central database in the anvi'o ecosystem. It essentially stores all information about a given set of (nucleotide) sequences from a FASTA file. To make a {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} from our reformatted FASTA, you can use the command {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-gen-contigs-database" %}:

{:.notice}
Numerous anvi'o commands can make use of multithreading to speed up computing time. You can either use the flag `-T` or `--num-threads`. Check the help page of a command, or use `--help` to check if multithreading is available.

```bash
anvi-gen-contigs-database -f Trichodesmium_sp.fa \
                          -o Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db \
                          -T 2
```

A few things happen when you generate a {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %}. First, all DNA sequences are stored in that database. You can retrieve the sequences in FASTA format by using the command {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-export-contigs" %}. Second, anvi'o uses [pyrodigal-gv](https://github.com/althonos/pyrodigal-gv) to identify open-reading frames (also referred to as 'gene calls'). Pyrodigal-gv is a python implementation of [Prodigal](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-119) with some additional metagenomic models for giant viruses and viruses with alternative genetic codes (see [Camargo et al.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01953-y)).

In addition to identifying open-reading frames, anvi'o will predict the amino acid sequence associated with each gene call and store it in that newly made database. If you need to get this information out of the database, you can use the command {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-export-gene-calls" %} to export the gene calls, and the amino acid sequence for each open-reading frame identified by pyrodigal-gv.

The command {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-gen-contigs-database" %} also computes the tetra-nucleotide frequency for each contig. To learn more about what it is, check the vocabulary page about [tetra-nucleotide frequency](https://anvio.org/vocabulary/#tetra-nucleotide-frequency).

### Annotate single-copy core genes and Ribosomal RNAs

There is a command called {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-hmms" %}, which lets you use Hidden Markov Models ([HMMs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_Markov_model)) to annotate the genes in a {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} and store those annotations directly back into the database.
The anvi'o codebase comes with an integrated set of default {% include ARTIFACT name="hmm-source" text="HMM sources" %}. They include models for 6 Ribosomal RNAs (16S, 23S, 5S, 18S, 28S, and 12S). They also include three sets of [single-copy core genes](https://anvio.org/vocabulary/#single-copy-core-gene-scg), named `Bacteria_71`, `Archaea_76` and `Protista_83`. The first two, `Bacteria_71` and `Archaea_76`, are collections of bacterial and archaeal single-copy core genes (SCGs) curated from [Mike Lee’s](https://twitter.com/AstrobioMike) SCG collections first released in [GToTree](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/35/20/4162/5378708), which is an easy-to-use phylogenomics workflow. `Protista_83` is [a curated collection](http://merenlab.org/delmont-euk-scgs) of [BUSCO](https://busco.ezlab.org/) SCGs made by [Tom Delmont](https://twitter.com/tomodelmont). These sets of HMMs are used in anvi'o to compute the estimated completeness and redundancy of a genome.

To annotate our {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} with these HHMs, we can simply run {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-hmms" %} like this:

```bash
anvi-run-hmms -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db -T 4
```

{:.notice}
There is an optional flag `--also-scan-trnas` which uses the program [tRNAScan-SE](https://github.com/UCSC-LoweLab/tRNAscan-SE) to identify and store information about tRNAs found in your genome. You can also use the command {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-scan-trnas" %} at any time.

Now is probably a good time to use the command {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-db-info" %}, which shows you basic information about any anvi'o database:
```bash
anvi-db-info Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db
```

With this command, you can see which HMMs were already run on that database, but also some basic information like the number of contigs, number of genes called by pyrodigal-gv, and more:

```
DB Info (no touch)
===============================================
Database Path ................................: Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db
description ..................................: [Not found, but it's OK]
db_type ......................................: contigs (variant: unknown)
version ......................................: 24


DB Info (no touch also)
===============================================
project_name .................................: Trichodesmium_sp
contigs_db_hash ..............................: hash0d1122fb
split_length .................................: 20000
kmer_size ....................................: 4
num_contigs ..................................: 269
total_length .................................: 6640707
num_splits ...................................: 358
gene_level_taxonomy_source ...................: None
genes_are_called .............................: 1
external_gene_calls ..........................: 0
external_gene_amino_acid_seqs ................: 0
skip_predict_frame ...........................: 0
splits_consider_gene_calls ...................: 1
trna_taxonomy_was_run ........................: 0
trna_taxonomy_database_version ...............: None
reaction_network_ko_annotations_hash .........: None
reaction_network_kegg_database_release .......: None
reaction_network_modelseed_database_sha ......: None
reaction_network_consensus_threshold .........: None
reaction_network_discard_ties ................: None
creation_date ................................: 1760017061.92556
scg_taxonomy_was_run .........................: 1
scg_taxonomy_database_version ................: GTDB: v214.1; Anvi'o: v1
gene_function_sources ........................: COG24_FUNCTION,COG24_PATHWAY,COG24_CATEGORY,KOfam,KEGG_BRITE,KEGG_Class,KEGG_Module
modules_db_hash ..............................: 66e53d49e65a

* Please remember that it is never a good idea to change these values. But in some
  cases it may be absolutely necessary to update something here, and a
  programmer may ask you to run this program and do it. But even then, you
  should be extremely careful.


AVAILABLE GENE CALLERS
===============================================
* 'pyrodigal-gv' (4,820 gene calls)


AVAILABLE FUNCTIONAL ANNOTATION SOURCES
===============================================
* No functional annotations found in this contigs database :/


AVAILABLE HMM SOURCES
===============================================
* 'Archaea_76' (76 models with 34 hits)
* 'Bacteria_71' (71 models with 72 hits)
* 'Protista_83' (83 models with 38 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_12S' (1 model with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_16S' (3 models with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_18S' (1 model with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_23S' (2 models with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_28S' (1 model with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_5S' (5 models with 0 hits)
```


#### General summary and metrics

To go one step further than the output generated by {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-db-info" %}, we can use the command {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-display-contigs-stats" %}. It allows you to visualize (and export) basic information about one or multiple {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" text= "contigs databases" %}.

```bash
anvi-display-contigs-stats Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db
```

{% include IMAGE path="/images/trichodesmium_tutorial/01_contigs_stats.png" width=80 %}

{:.notice}
The approximate number of genomes is an estimate based on the frequency of each single-copy core gene (more info [here](https://anvio.org/help/main/programs/anvi-display-contigs-stats/#how-do-we-predict-the-number-of-genomes)). It is mostly useful in a metagenomics context, where you expect multiple microbial populations to be included in your set of contigs. This estimate is based on the mode (or most frequently occurring number) of single-copy core genes. Here, we know we generated a {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} with a single genome, hence the expected number of genomes = 1 bacteria. GOOD.

You can also export the information displayed on your browser by running {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-display-contigs-stats" %} with the flag `--output-file` or `-o`. Anvi'o will then write a TAB-delimited file with the above values. And if you don't want the browser page to open at all, you can also use the flag `--report-as-text`.

```bash
anvi-display-contigs-stats Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db --report-as-text -o Trichodesmium_sp-contigs-stats.txt
```

### Estimate completeness and redundancy

We can use the set of single-copy core genes (SCGs) to estimate the completeness of a genome. The rationale is pretty simple: we expect a set of genes to be systematically present in all genomes only once. So if we find all these genes, we estimate that the genome is complete (100%). We can also report how many SCGs are found in multiple copies, which we refer to as SCG 'redundancy'.

{:.notice}
Why redundancy and not contamination? The presence of multiple copies of SCGs could be indicative of contamination in your genome - i.e., the potential presence of more than one population - but microbial genomes have a bad habit of keeping a few SCGs in multiple copies. So until proven otherwise, anvi’o calls it redundancy and you will decide if you think it is contamination.

We can use the command {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-estimate-genome-completeness" %}:

```bash
anvi-estimate-genome-completeness -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db
```

|**`bin name`**|**`domain`**|**`confidence`**|**`% completion`**|**`% redundancy`**|**`num_splits`**|**`total length`**|
|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|
|Trichodesmium_sp-contigs|BACTERIA|1.0|97.18|4.23|358|6640707|

From the output, we learn that our MAG is estimated to be 97% complete and 4% redundant. 

You can also use the flag `--output-file` or `-o` to save the output into a text file.

### Estimate SCG taxonomy

In this part of the tutorial, we will cover how anvi'o can generate a quick taxonomic estimation for a genome (also works for a metagenome). Of course, in this example, we already know that our genome is from the genus _Trichodesmium_ (because its information on NCBI said so). But we don't know exactly which species of _Trichodesmium_ it is. You can also imagine doing this step without _any_ prior knowledge about the taxonomy of your microbe.

The way anvi'o estimates taxonomy is by using a subset of genes found in the bacterial and archaeal SCG collections: the ribosomal proteins. These proteins are commonly used to compute phylogenomic trees. Briefly, anvi'o uses the Genome Taxonomy Database ([GTDB](https://gtdb.ecogenomic.org/)) and `diamond` (a fast alternative to NCBI’s BLASTp) to compare your ribosomal proteins to those found in the GTDB collection. Each ribosomal protein thus gets a closest taxonomic match. This is done with the command {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-scg-taxonomy" %}, which stores the taxonomic annotations directly in the {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %}.

Let's run {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-scg-taxonomy" %}:

```bash
anvi-run-scg-taxonomy -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db -T 4
```

{:.notice}
If this step is not working for you, you may need to run {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-setup-scg-taxonomy" %} to download and initialize the GTDB SCG database on your machine. You only need to run this command once.

In your terminal, you should see the number of ribosomal proteins that had a match to a homologous protein from the GTDB collection. But you don't get the actual taxonomy yet. For that, you need to run a second program called {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy" %}. This command will compute the consensus taxonomic annotation across a set of ribosomal proteins. If we simply provide our {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} as the sole input to {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy" %}, then anvi'o will assume it contains a single genome and compute the consensus across all ribosomal protein matches.

Let's run {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy" %}:

```bash
anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db
```
```
Contigs DB ...................................: Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db
Metagenome mode ..............................: False

Estimated taxonomy for "Trichodesmium_sp"
===============================================
+------------------+--------------+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                  |   total_scgs |   supporting_scgs | taxonomy                                                                                                                   |
+==================+==============+===================+============================================================================================================================+
| Trichodesmium_sp |           22 |                21 | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+------------------+--------------+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

Note that the command used a total of 22 SCGs - more specifically, the ribosomal proteins that are part of the SCG collection - and we now have an estimated species name: *Trichodesmium erythraeum*.

In the output, you can also see `supporting_scgs` with the number `21`. It corresponds to the number of ribosomal proteins which all agreed with the reported consensus taxonomy. It also means that ONE ribosomal protein has a different taxonomic match.

If you are curious, we can run the same command with the flag `--debug`:

```bash
anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db --debug
```
```
Contigs DB ...................................: Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db
Metagenome mode ..............................: False

* A total of 22 single-copy core genes with taxonomic affiliations were
  successfully initialized from the contigs database 🎉 Following shows the
  frequency of these SCGs: Ribosomal_L1 (1), Ribosomal_L13 (1), Ribosomal_L14
  (1), Ribosomal_L16 (1), Ribosomal_L17 (1), Ribosomal_L19 (1), Ribosomal_L2
  (1), Ribosomal_L20 (1), Ribosomal_L21p (1), Ribosomal_L22 (1), Ribosomal_L27A
  (1), Ribosomal_L3 (1), Ribosomal_L4 (1), Ribosomal_L5 (1), Ribosomal_S11 (1),
  Ribosomal_S15 (1), Ribosomal_S16 (1), Ribosomal_S2 (1), Ribosomal_S6 (1),
  Ribosomal_S7 (1), Ribosomal_S8 (1), Ribosomal_S9 (1).

Hits for Trichodesmium_sp
===============================================
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SCG            | gene   | pct id   | taxonomy                                                                                                                   |
+================+========+==========+============================================================================================================================+
| Ribosomal_L19  | 2881   | 99.2     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_S2   | 1476   | 99.3     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L20  | 967    | 99.2     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_S6   | 4430   | 95.7     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_S9   | 1368   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L13  | 1369   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L17  | 1371   | 98.3     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_S11  | 1373   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L21p | 352    | 99.3     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L27A | 1378   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_S8   | 1382   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L5   | 1383   | 99.4     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L14  | 1385   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium /                          |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L16  | 1388   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L22  | 1390   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_S15  | 1646   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L2   | 1392   | 97.9     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L4   | 1394   | 99.5     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L3   | 1395   | 98.2     | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_S7   | 3771   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_L1   | 2877   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ribosomal_S16  | 1407   | 100.0    | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| CONSENSUS      | --     | --       | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+----------------+--------+----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Estimated taxonomy for "Trichodesmium_sp"
===============================================
+------------------+--------------+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                  |   total_scgs |   supporting_scgs | taxonomy                                                                                                                   |
+==================+==============+===================+============================================================================================================================+
| Trichodesmium_sp |           22 |                21 | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / Cyanobacteriales / Microcoleaceae / Trichodesmium / Trichodesmium erythraeum |
+------------------+--------------+-------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

In this more comprehensive output, you can see the detail of each ribosomal protein's closest match to the GTDB SCG database: which protein, the percent identity to an homologous gene in the GTDB collection, and the associated taxonomy. You can see that ribosomal protein L14 has a taxonomy that is not resolved at the species level, but only at the genus level. So, the only ribosomal protein that did not agree with the final taxonomy was actually matching the same genus. I would not be worried at all about potential contamination, at least at this stage.

The way anvi'o estimates taxonomy is not perfect. In fact, it is limited to Bacteria and Archaea (genomes found in GTDB). But it is fast and relatively accurate to give you an idea of the taxonomy of one or more genomes.

{:.notice}
If you are working with a metagenome, i.e. with more than one population, anvi'o can either compute the taxonomy per bin (if available), or without binning! In the second case, anvi'o will pick the most commonly found ribosomal protein and report their closest taxonomic matches. This is a great way to quickly get an idea of the taxonomic composition of a metagenome prior to binning.

### Functional annotations

There are many databases that one can use to assign function to a set of genes. You may be familiar with [NCBI's COG](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/cog) (Clusters of Orthologous Genes) database, the [KEGG](https://www.genome.jp/kegg/) (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database of KEGG Ortholog families (KOfam), or [Pfam](http://pfam.xfam.org/) (the Protein Family database), which can be used for annotating general functions. Other databases out there are more specific, like [CAZymes](https://www.cazy.org/) which focuses on enzymes associated with the synthesis, metabolism and recognition of carbohydrate, or [PHROGs](https://phrogs.lmge.uca.fr/) which focuses on viral functions.

Anvi'o has a few commands that allow you to annotate the open-reading frames in your {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} with several different databases. Each of them comes with a setup command that you need to run once to download the appropriate database on your machine:

Database | Setup command | Run command
-- | -- | --
NCBI COGs | {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-setup-ncbi-cogs" %} | {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-ncbi-cogs" %}
KEGG KOfam | {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-setup-kegg-data" %} | {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-kegg-kofams" %}
Pfam | {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-setup-pfams" %} | {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-pfams" %}
CAZymes | {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-setup-cazymes" %} | {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-cazymes" %}

If your favorite annotation database is not represented here, you have a few options:
- **Short-term solution**: run the annotation outside of anvi'o. You can export the gene calls with {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-export-gene-calls" %}, run your annotation with a third party software, then import the annotations back into your {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} with {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-import-functions" %}.
- **Community-level solution**: find an anvi'o developer and tell them about your passion for XXX functional database and hope they make a new command called `anvi-run-XXX`. We seriously encourage you to use the [anvi'o github page](https://github.com/merenlab/anvio) to write an issue describing the need for a new functional annotation database in anvi'o. Then, anyone with time and skill can try to implement it. If you find an existing issue discussing something you want in anvi'o, please raise your voice, write a comment, and let the developers know that you would like to see a feature in anvi'o.
- **Developer-level solution**: write a new program to annotate a {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} with your favorite database, and submit a pull request on the [anvi'o github page](https://github.com/merenlab/anvio).

For now, we will use the COG, KEGG, and Pfam databases on our *Trichodesmium* genome. {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-ncbi-cogs" %} will be relatively fast (it uses `diamond` to find homologous hits in the database), while {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-kegg-kofams" %} will take much longer as the KOfam database is quite large (this program uses HMMs and HMMER in the background). The Pfam database also uses HMMs, but the domain-level models are a bit smaller so {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-pfams" %} is relatively quick to run.

{:.notice}
If you know your machine can use more threads, feel free to change the flag `-T 4` to another number.

```bash
# will take ~1 min
anvi-run-ncbi-cogs -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db -T 4

# will take ~8 min
anvi-run-kegg-kofams -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db -T 4

# will take ~1 min
anvi-run-pfams -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db -T 4
```

As you can see in the terminal output from the commands above, there are no output files. All the annotations are stored into the {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %}. You can use {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-db-info" %} to check which functional annotations are already in an existing {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} (including manually imported ones).

```bash
# check which annotations were run on our contigs database
anvi-db-info Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db
```
```
DB Info (no touch)
===============================================
Database Path ................................: Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db
description ..................................: [Not found, but it's OK]
db_type ......................................: contigs (variant: unknown)
version ......................................: 24


DB Info (no touch also)
===============================================
project_name .................................: Trichodesmium_sp
contigs_db_hash ..............................: hash98a3e869
split_length .................................: 20000
kmer_size ....................................: 4
num_contigs ..................................: 269
total_length .................................: 6640707
num_splits ...................................: 358
gene_level_taxonomy_source ...................: None
genes_are_called .............................: 1
external_gene_calls ..........................: 0
external_gene_amino_acid_seqs ................: 0
skip_predict_frame ...........................: 0
splits_consider_gene_calls ...................: 1
trna_taxonomy_was_run ........................: 0
trna_taxonomy_database_version ...............: None
reaction_network_ko_annotations_hash .........: None
reaction_network_kegg_database_release .......: None
reaction_network_modelseed_database_sha ......: None
reaction_network_consensus_threshold .........: None
reaction_network_discard_ties ................: None
creation_date ................................: 1759736966.76845
scg_taxonomy_was_run .........................: 1
scg_taxonomy_database_version ................: GTDB: v214.1; Anvi'o: v1
gene_function_sources ........................: COG24_CATEGORY,KEGG_BRITE,KEGG_Module,COG24_PATHWAY,KOfam,COG24_FUNCTION,KEGG_Class
modules_db_hash ..............................: a2b5bde358bb

* Please remember that it is never a good idea to change these values. But in some
  cases it may be absolutely necessary to update something here, and a
  programmer may ask you to run this program and do it. But even then, you
  should be extremely careful.


AVAILABLE GENE CALLERS
===============================================
* 'pyrodigal-gv' (4,820 gene calls)


AVAILABLE FUNCTIONAL ANNOTATION SOURCES
===============================================
* COG24_CATEGORY (3,098 annotations)
* COG24_FUNCTION (3,098 annotations)
* COG24_PATHWAY (858 annotations)
* KEGG_BRITE (1,939 annotations)
* KEGG_Class (449 annotations)
* KEGG_Module (449 annotations)
* KOfam (1,941 annotations)


AVAILABLE HMM SOURCES
===============================================
* 'Archaea_76' (76 models with 34 hits)
* 'Bacteria_71' (71 models with 72 hits)
* 'Protista_83' (83 models with 38 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_12S' (1 model with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_16S' (3 models with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_18S' (1 model with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_23S' (2 models with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_28S' (1 model with 0 hits)
* 'Ribosomal_RNA_5S' (5 models with 0 hits)
```

You can also use {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-export-functions" %} to get a tab-delimited file of all the annotations from a given annotation source (or multiple).

```bash
# export functions for KOfam and COG24_FUCTION
anvi-export-functions -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db --annotation-sources KOfam,COG24_FUNCTION -o functional_annotations.txt
```

The output table from {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-export-functions" %} looks like this:

|**`gene_callers_id`**|**`source`**|**`accession`**|**`function`**|**`e_value`**|
|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|
|0|COG24_FUNCTION|COG3293|Transposase|5.51e-12|
|2|COG24_FUNCTION|COG4451|Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase small subunit (RbcS) (PDB:2YBV)|2.02e-63|
|4|COG24_FUNCTION|COG1850|Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase, large subunit, or a RuBisCO-like protein (RbcL) (PDB:2YBV)|0|
|..|..|..|..|..|
|4765|KOfam|K02030|polar amino acid transport system substrate-binding protein|1.7e-26|
|4769|KOfam|K07494|putative transposase|3.6e-16|
|4813|KOfam|K11524|positive phototaxis protein PixI|4e-37|


You can search for your favorite function. As we discussed above, _Trichodesmium_ is known for its ability to fix nitrogen, so you can look for the `NifH` gene, which is a marker gene for nitrogen fixation. Here is how to do that with a simple `grep` command:

```bash
grep NifH functional_annotations.txt
```
```
3709	COG24_FUNCTION	COG1348	Nitrogenase ATPase subunit NifH/coenzyme F430 biosynthesis subunit CfbC (NifH/CfbC) (PDB:1CP2) (PUBMED:28225763)	1.5e-197
4020	COG24_FUNCTION	COG1348	Nitrogenase ATPase subunit NifH/coenzyme F430 biosynthesis subunit CfbC (NifH/CfbC) (PDB:1CP2) (PUBMED:28225763)	4.81e-167
4020	KOfam	K02588	nitrogenase iron protein NifH	2.9e-144
```

This is unexpected: there are two genes (caller id: 3709 and 4020) with the NifH annotation. On of them has both an annotation by COG and KEGG; that's good, we like consistency. But we expect to find only one copy of the NifH gene, and the other gene only has a COG annotation. Turns out that the COG annotation is not very reliable and in the paper, Tom noticed that the COG was wrongly annotating a Ferredoxin as NifH:

<blockquote markdown="1">
For instance, we found that genes with COG20 function incorrectly annotated as “Nitrogenase ATPase subunit NifH/coenzyme F430 biosynthesis subunit CfbC” correspond, in reality, to “ferredoxin: protochlorophyllide reductase.”
<div class="blockquote-author">
<a href="https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2112355118">doi:10.1073/pnas.2112355118</a>
</div>
</blockquote>

An alternative search strategy: you can use {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-search-functions" %}, this time using only the `KOfam` annotation source:
```bash
anvi-search-functions -c Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db \
                      --search-term NifH \
                      --annotation-sources KOfam \
                      --output-file NifH_search.txt \
                      --full-report NifH_full_report.txt
```

The first output file called `NifH_search.txt` only contains the name of the contigs where a gene with a matching search term was found. And the second file, `NifH_full_report.txt`, is more comprehensive:

```bash
cat NifH_full_report.txt
```
```
gene_callers_id	source	accession	function	search_term	contigs
4020	KOfam	K02588	nitrogenase iron protein NifH	NifH	Trichodesmium_sp_MAG_R01_000000000230_split_00006
```

We've found our marker gene for nitrogen fixation, which is a good sign given that this MAG seems to be a *T. erythraeum* genome, and *T. erythraeum* is known to fix nitrogen.

### Working with multiple genomes

Now that we know how to do basic genomic analysis using a single genome, we can try to do the same using a few more genomes. In the directory `00_FASTA_GENOMES`, you will find seven FASTA files containing the reference genomes and MAGs from Tom's paper:

```
$ ls 00_DATA/fasta
MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_miru.fa     MAG_Trichodesmium_erythraeum.fa          MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Indian.fa   Trichodesmium_thiebautii_H9_4.fa
MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_nobis.fa    MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Atlantic.fa Trichodesmium_erythraeum_IMS101.fa
```

We will create as many {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" text="contigs databases" %} as we have genomes in this directory. We will then annotate them in a similar fashion as when working with a single genome.

To avoid too much manual labor, we'll use BASH loops to automate the process. The loops will be a bit easier to write (and understand) if we have a text file of genome names to iterate over. So first, let's create a simple text file that contains the names of our genomes. The following BASH command will list the content of the `00_FASTA_GENOMES` directory and will only keep the part of the file name before the `.fa` extension, a.k.a. only the name of each genome:

```bash
ls 00_DATA/fasta | cut -d "." -f1 > genomes.txt
```

The second thing to do is to make sure our FASTA files are properly formatted. Fortunately for you, we provided genomes with anvi'o compatible headers. If you don't believe me (and you should never believe me, and always check your data), then have a look at them.

The next step is to generate {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} for each of our genomes with the following BASH loop:

```bash
while read genome
do
    anvi-gen-contigs-database -f 00_DATA/fasta/${genome}.fa \
                              -o ${genome}-contigs.db \
                              -T 4
done < genomes.txt
```

Now we can annotate these genomes with {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-hmms" %}, {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-ncbi-cogs" %}, {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-kegg-kofams" %}, and {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-pfams" %}. Some of those annotation commands can take a while, so if you don't want to wait, click the Show/Hide box below to instead get the already-annotated contigs databases from the datapack:

<details markdown="1"><summary>Show/Hide Option 1: Copy pre-annotated databases</summary>

This command overwrite the databases in your current working directory with our pre-annotated ones from the `00_DATA` folder:

```bash
cp 00_DATA/contigs/*-contigs.db .
```

</details>

But if you do want to run the annotations yourself, I encourage you to try writing the loop before checking the answer in the following Show/Hide box:

<details markdown="1"><summary>Show/Hide Option 2: Loop to annotate all databases</summary>

```bash
while read genome
do
    echo "working on $genome"
    anvi-run-hmms -c ${genome}-contigs.db -T 4
    anvi-run-ncbi-cogs -c ${genome}-contigs.db -T 4
    anvi-run-kegg-kofams -c ${genome}-contigs.db -T 4
    anvi-run-pfams -c ${genome}-contigs.db -T 4
    anvi-run-scg-taxonomy -c ${genome}-contigs.db -T 4
done < genomes.txt
```

</details>

You don't always need to write a loop to process multiple {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" text="contigs databases" %}. Some commands, like {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-estimate-genome-completeness" %}, can work on multiple input databases and will create individual outputs for each one. In these cases, you can use a special table that we call an {% include ARTIFACT name="external-genomes" text="'external genomes' file" %}. It is a simple two-column table containing the name of each {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} and the path to each database.

You can make that table yourself easily, but if you are like me - too lazy to do that by yourself - then you can use {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-script-gen-genomes-file" %}:

```bash
anvi-script-gen-genomes-file --input-dir . -o external-genomes.txt
```

And here is how this {% include ARTIFACT name="external-genomes" %} file looks like:

|**`name`**|**`contigs_db_path`**|
|:--|:--|
|MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_miru|/path/to/MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_miru-contigs.db|
|MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_nobis|/path/to/MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_nobis-contigs.db|
|MAG_Trichodesmium_erythraeum|/path/to/MAG_Trichodesmium_erythraeum-contigs.db|
|MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Atlantic|/path/to/MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Atlantic-contigs.db|
|MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Indian|/path/to/MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Indian-contigs.db|
|Trichodesmium_erythraeum_IMS101|/path/to/Trichodesmium_erythraeum_IMS101-contigs.db|
|Trichodesmium_sp|/path/to/Trichodesmium_sp-contigs.db|
|Trichodesmium_thiebautii_H9_4|/path/to/Trichodesmium_thiebautii_H9_4-contigs.db|

Now we can use this file as the input for commands like {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-estimate-genome-completeness" %} and {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy" %}:

```bash
anvi-estimate-genome-completeness -e external-genomes.txt
```
```
+---------------------------------------+----------+--------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
| genome name                           | domain   |   confidence |   % completion |   % redundancy |   num_splits |   total length |
+=======================================+==========+==============+================+================+==============+================+
| MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_miru     | BACTERIA |            1 |          98.59 |           7.04 |          665 |        5425804 |
+---------------------------------------+----------+--------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
| MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_nobis    | BACTERIA |          0.9 |          95.77 |           2.82 |          768 |        6101640 |
+---------------------------------------+----------+--------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
| MAG_Trichodesmium_erythraeum          | BACTERIA |            1 |          97.18 |           5.63 |          644 |        6773488 |
+---------------------------------------+----------+--------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
| MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Atlantic | BACTERIA |          0.9 |          85.92 |           7.04 |         1136 |        5948726 |
+---------------------------------------+----------+--------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
| MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Indian   | BACTERIA |            1 |          94.37 |           2.82 |         1394 |        6834732 |
+---------------------------------------+----------+--------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
| Trichodesmium_erythraeum_IMS101       | BACTERIA |            1 |          97.18 |           7.04 |          386 |        7750108 |
+---------------------------------------+----------+--------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
| Trichodesmium_sp                      | BACTERIA |            1 |          97.18 |           4.23 |          358 |        6640707 |
+---------------------------------------+----------+--------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
| Trichodesmium_thiebautii_H9_4         | BACTERIA |          0.8 |          71.83 |          12.68 |          201 |        3286556 |
+---------------------------------------+----------+--------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
```

Note that `Trichodesmium_thiebautii_H9_4` appears to have quite a low completion estimate and also a rather large redundancy estimate. Just from these two values, we could say that the quality of that MAG is lower than all other genomes in our collection. You may also notice that it has a much smaller genome size (last column).

Let's try estimating the taxonomy of all our genomes at once with {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy" %}:

```bash
anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy -e external-genomes.txt -o taxonomy_multi_genomes.txt
```
```
Num genomes ..................................: 8
Taxonomic level of interest ..................: (None specified by the user, so 'all levels')
Output file path .............................: taxonomy_multi_genomes.txt
Output raw data ..............................: False
SCG coverages will be computed? ..............: False
* Your (meta)genome file DOES NOT contain profile databases, and you haven't asked
  anvi'o to work in `--metagenome-mode`. Your contigs databases will be treated
  as genomes rather than metagenomes.


Output file ..................................: taxonomy_multi_genomes.txt
```

And here is the output:

|**`name`**|**`total_scgs`**|**`supporting_scgs`**|**`t_domain`**|**`t_phylum`**|**`t_class`**|**`t_order`**|**`t_family`**|**`t_genus`**|**`t_species`**|
|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|:--|
|MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_miru|22|15|Bacteria|Cyanobacteriota|Cyanobacteriia|Cyanobacteriales|Microcoleaceae|Trichodesmium|Trichodesmium sp023356515|
|MAG_Candidatus_Trichodesmium_nobis|20|13|Bacteria|Cyanobacteriota|Cyanobacteriia|Cyanobacteriales|Microcoleaceae|Trichodesmium|Trichodesmium sp023356535|
|MAG_Trichodesmium_erythraeum|22|21|Bacteria|Cyanobacteriota|Cyanobacteriia|Cyanobacteriales|Microcoleaceae|Trichodesmium|Trichodesmium erythraeum|
|MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Atlantic|21|21|Bacteria|Cyanobacteriota|Cyanobacteriia|Cyanobacteriales|Microcoleaceae|Trichodesmium|Trichodesmium sp023356605|
|MAG_Trichodesmium_thiebautii_Indian|22|21|Bacteria|Cyanobacteriota|Cyanobacteriia|Cyanobacteriales|Microcoleaceae|Trichodesmium|Trichodesmium sp023356605|
|Trichodesmium_erythraeum_IMS101|22|21|Bacteria|Cyanobacteriota|Cyanobacteriia|Cyanobacteriales|Microcoleaceae|Trichodesmium|Trichodesmium erythraeum|
|Trichodesmium_sp|22|21|Bacteria|Cyanobacteriota|Cyanobacteriia|Cyanobacteriales|Microcoleaceae|Trichodesmium|Trichodesmium erythraeum|
|Trichodesmium_thiebautii_H9_4|19|18|Bacteria|Cyanobacteriota|Cyanobacteriia|Cyanobacteriales|Microcoleaceae|Trichodesmium|Trichodesmium sp023356605|

You can see that a lot of the MAGs match to unnamed species in GTDB -- even though we already know what most of them are, those names haven't propagated to the GTDB database yet. This especially makes sense for the candidate species *T. miru* and *T. nobis*. Regardless, all the *T. thiebautii* genomes have the same closest match to *T. sp023356535*.

<div class="extra-info" markdown="1">

<span class="extra-info-header">A note on anvi'o workflows</span>
There are a few built-in snakemake workflows in anvi'o that can be used with the program {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-workflow" %}.
We regularly use these workflows for routine analyses, like generating {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" text="contigs databases" %} and running functional annotations. That is exactly the purpose of the ['contigs' workflow](https://anvio.org/help/main/workflows/contigs/).

You don't need to know anything about snakemake to use these workflows. For instance, for the 'contigs' workflow, all you need is two input files:
- A {% include ARTIFACT name="fasta-txt" %} file, which is basically a two-column table with the name and path to each FASTA file that you want to turn into a {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %}
- A {% include ARTIFACT name="workflow-config" %} file (which you can get from {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-workflow" %}) in which you can specify which commands you want to run and parameters for each command.

This automation sounds like a nice plug-and-play analysis pipeline - and it is - but it requires you to know exactly what you want to run. You are still the chef.

Want to learn more? Check out [this other tutorial on running workflows in anvi'o](https://anvio.org/tutorials/scaling-up/).

</div>


### Working with one (or more) metagenomes

If you are working with one, or more, metagenomic assemblies, you can use and run the same commands that we ran on individual genomes. This includes {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-gen-contigs-database" %}, {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-hmms" %}, {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-scg-taxonomy" %}, {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-run-kegg-kofams" %}, etc.

In the datapack, you will find the {% include ARTIFACT name="contigs-db" %} of a mock metagenome assembly that we made for you.
With {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-display-contigs-stats" %}, we can learn about the count and length of contigs in the assembly, as well as the number of expected genomes:

```bash
anvi-display-contigs-stats 00_DATA/metagenome/sample01-contigs.db
```

{% include IMAGE path="/images/trichodesmium_tutorial/geno_02.png" width=80 %}

This assembly is estimated to contain six populations. To learn more about the composition of this metagenome, we can use {% include PROGRAM name="anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy" %} with the flag `--metagenome-mode`. In this mode, anvi'o will not try to compute the consensus taxonomy of every ribosomal protein as it does by default. Instead, it will report the taxonomy of all the genes matching to the most abundant ribosomal protein:

```bash
anvi-estimate-scg-taxonomy -c 00_DATA/metagenome/sample01-contigs.db --metagenome-mode
```
```
Contigs DB ...................................: 00_DATA/sample01-contigs.db
Metagenome mode ..............................: True
SCG for metagenome ...........................: None

* A total of 132 single-copy core genes with taxonomic affiliations were
  successfully initialized from the contigs database 🎉 Following shows the
  frequency of these SCGs: Ribosomal_L1 (6), Ribosomal_L13 (6), Ribosomal_L14
  (6), Ribosomal_L16 (6), Ribosomal_L17 (6), Ribosomal_L19 (6), Ribosomal_L2
  (6), Ribosomal_L20 (6), Ribosomal_L21p (6), Ribosomal_L22 (6), Ribosomal_L27A
  (6), Ribosomal_L3 (6), Ribosomal_L4 (6), Ribosomal_L5 (6), Ribosomal_S11 (6),
  Ribosomal_S15 (6), Ribosomal_S16 (6), Ribosomal_S2 (6), Ribosomal_S6 (6),
  Ribosomal_S7 (6), Ribosomal_S8 (6), Ribosomal_S9 (6).

WARNING
===============================================
Anvi'o automatically set 'Ribosomal_L1' to be THE single-copy core gene to
survey your metagenome for its taxonomic composition. If you are not happy with
that, you could change it with the parameter `--scg-name-for-metagenome-mode`.


Taxa in metagenome "metagenome_assembly"
===============================================
+----------------------------------------+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                        |   percent_identity | taxonomy                                                                                                                 |
+========================================+====================+==========================================================================================================================+
| metagenome_assembly_Ribosomal_L1_10579 |                100 | Bacteria / Pseudomonadota / Gammaproteobacteria / Pseudomonadales / Oleiphilaceae / Marinobacter / Marinobacter salarius |
+----------------------------------------+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| metagenome_assembly_Ribosomal_L1_12451 |                100 | Bacteria / Cyanobacteriota / Cyanobacteriia / PCC-6307 / Cyanobiaceae / Prochlorococcus_A /                              |
+----------------------------------------+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| metagenome_assembly_Ribosomal_L1_15984 |                100 | Bacteria / Pseudomonadota / Alphaproteobacteria / Rhizobiales / Stappiaceae / Roseibium / Roseibium aggregatum           |
+----------------------------------------+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| metagenome_assembly_Ribosomal_L1_3513  |               99.6 | Bacteria / Pseudomonadota / Gammaproteobacteria / Enterobacterales_A / Alteromonadaceae / Alteromonas /                  |
+----------------------------------------+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| metagenome_assembly_Ribosomal_L1_5126  |                100 | Bacteria / Pseudomonadota / Alphaproteobacteria / HIMB59 / HIMB59 / HIMB59 / HIMB59 sp000299115                          |
+----------------------------------------+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| metagenome_assembly_Ribosomal_L1_5655  |               99.6 | Bacteria / Pseudomonadota / Alphaproteobacteria / Pelagibacterales / Pelagibacteraceae / Pelagibacter /                  |
+----------------------------------------+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

Alternatively, you can tell anvi'o you want to use another ribosomal protein. The output of the above comment is already telling us that each ribosomal protein is present six times, so any gene should do the job. You can also use the flag `--report-scg-frequencies`, which will write these frequencies into a text file.

<div class="extra-info" markdown="1">

<span class="extra-info-header">A matrix output with multiple metagenomes</span>

If you have multiple metagenomes, you can use the flag `--matrix` to get an output file that looks like this (example output at the genus level):

| **taxon**            | **sample01** | **sample02** | **sample03** | **sample04** | **sample05** | **sample06** |
| -------------------- | ------------ | ------------ | ------------ | ------------ | ------------ | ------------ |
| Prochlorococcus      | 1.00         | 1.00         | 1.00         | 1.00         | 1.00         | 1.00         |
| Synechococcus        | 1.00         | 0            | 1.00         | 1.00         | 0            | 1.00         |
| Pelagibacter         | 1.00         | 1.00         | 1.00         | 1.00         | 1.00         | 1.00         |
| SAR86                | 1.00         | 1.00         | 0            | 1.00         | 1.00         | 1.00         |
| SAR92                | 0            | 1.00         | 1.00         | 0            | 1.00         | 1.00         |
| SAR116               | 1.00         | 0            | 1.00         | 1.00         | 0            | 1.00         |
| Roseobacter          | 0            | 1.00         | 1.00         | 0            | 1.00         | 0            |

</div>

## The next chapter

If you want to immediately move on to the next chapter of this tutorial, here is the link:

- [Chapter 2: Pangenomics]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/trichodesmium-tutorial/chapter-2)

If you want to go back to the main page of the tutorial instead, [click here]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/trichodesmium-tutorial/).

{:.notice}
 If you have any questions about this exercise, or have ideas to make it better, please feel free to get in touch with the anvi'o community through our Discord server:

 {% include _join-anvio-discord.html %}